---
layout: post
title: "High-frequency trading: a proposal for stopping it (feedback please)"
---
##Why do we have high-frequency trading?

First off: this is not a proposal to ban or decrease free trade in stocks. Stock Exchanges are one of the more important innovations in capitalism. They are a regulated and safe place to trade in shares of enterprises (and much more). A trader on an exchange does not have to worry if the stocks offered are real, if the buyer will actually pay, etc. These are important worries when you are closing big financial transactions. The stock exchange does its very best to keep this environment predictable, safe and legal. I will now give a very simplistic description of how trading on a stock exchange works.

The way trades on an exchange usually occur is using a book. There are to kinds of bids: “I’d like to buy X stocks of A for the maximum price of Y” and “I’d like to sell X stocks of A for the minimum price of Y”. Each of these orders results in a line written in the book. The difference between the highest sell and lowest buy orders is called the spread. When to two sides meet, a transaction occurs.

There is a drawback to putting your order in the book bluntly. If you put your buy order in the book, it is there for the world to see. A seller entering the market that would be willing to sell for even less, will of course when he sees your offer, place a sell order for the exact same price as your buy order. Transaction occurs, but the seller gets a slightly better price than she expected. Now of course, another seller might try to do the same, so if your strategy is to shoot in let orders that exactly match an existing buy order, you might be just too late. The transaction has already occurred, the buy order is gone and you are left with a buy order in the book (which you then remove again).

Over the last decade, stock trading has evolved to an ecosystem of trading algorithms that do more or less this: they are programmed to quickly react to other orders appearing in the book (which of course has ceased to be a real paper book long ago). Of course, these programs are mostly trading with other programs. When a ‘real’ investor enters the market (who wants to buy stock for the long run), he never trades with a 'real’ investor wanting to sell. The market is made by thousands of automatically trading 'algos’. Eventually, the stocks end up with the buyer. The best algorithms will have made some pennies in the process. This practice has existed on markets before computers did it. It is called 'market making’ and is considered good for the market: it efficiently brings the market to a realistic price and reduces large price jumps (volatility).

##So what is wrong with this?

A computer programmer would immediately recognize this situation as a gigantic 'race condition’. All these programs competing to be the first to react and to outsmart each other create a completely unpredictable and possibly unstable system. The problem is not that traders use computer programs to trade and to make decisions, but the fact that the arms race in these programs centers not around creating smarter programs, taking more information into account or creating better decisions on that information. The race focuses on speed alone. Apparently making the right decision is considered easy most of the time and the money is in being first in line writing in the book. This causes many things that are not in the common interest. Otherwise irrational investments in technology are made to get your orders in a few nanoseconds faster, like renting expensive rack space very close to the exchange computer (the length of the cable from your machine to the exchange is the relevant asset), building direct connections between Wall Street and Tokyo under the North Pole, etc… There are now four direct data connections between Chicago and New York, three of them built specifically to make trading round trip times a bit (as in 4 ms) shorter. One could argue that these investments create jobs, but they could have created more if invested in something that generates real value.

But my largest worry is that this race will cause pressure to keep the trading programs stupid. Doing consistency checks, looking up a news database to check if anything actually explains sudden value losses, all of that is wasted time in the rush for the first place in line. Moreover, extreme optimization for performance will typically make software less understandable, maintainable and reliable. This situation forces the trading floors where much of our real economy is happening in the hands of a bunch of simplistic models that base their behavior only on the behavior of the rest of them. A flash crash will, of course, not change the actual value of the Coca Cola Company, but it could instantaneously vaporize the value of your pensions fund.

##So how could we make the trading floor a safe place for genuine traders again?

We still want the real buyer and seller to find each other and market making will still be needed. Moreover: automated trading algorithms will probably be the most efficient way of market making. But we want to allow everyone enough time to make the speed of light and the distance to the data center mostly irrelevant. It is important that after an order appears in the book, all traders have a finite, but relatively long period of time to place their counter-orders. They should also not be allowed to see their opponents send in the orders. This can be easily achieved by having the exchange work in batch mode instead of continuous mode.

An example: let’s put the heartbeat to 1 second. Each trader can deliver buy and sell orders whenever they like, but once per second, the exchange queues them all up and puts all orders in the book at once and when trades can be made based on those orders, they are performed in random order. Directly after the calculation of the trades, the book is published. That is the time that everyone can see the current market and think about placing new orders. So it doesn’t matter if you place your order within a few milliseconds after the last publication of the book or after 900 ms, everyone participates in the random drawing. Unless you are just too late of course, in which case your order will be processed 1 second later.

I cannot see how this system would be bad for markets or genuine investors. I can see how some traders will oppose this system, because they are deeply invested in technology that only has value when nanoseconds count. I can also see how exchanges would rather see trades occur every millisecond than every second. Presumably, higher frequencies amount to a larger total volume of trade. This is what the exchanges make their money from. But from a 'common good’ point of view, I’d think that we have to stop trading with as little thought as possible.

I am not a stock exchange expert and I may have cut some corners in the description above. Please feel free to correct those. But even more, I’d be interested to hear arguments why trading in a 1 sec. heartbeat wouldn’t work or would create new problems.
 